Add leaving Facebook post (#323)
trinodb/trino.io: _posts/2022-08-02-leaving-facebook-meta-best-for-trino.md

the forefront for the project to remain healthy.

It was also at this point we made our single biggest mistake. We didn’t change
the name away from Presto. It was admittedly hard to walk away from a name we
all knew and loved. We believed that we had set up the project, so that the name
"Presto" was owned by the community and not Facebook. The truth is that once the
community walked out of the project, Facebook was the only one left in Presto
and they became the sole owner. But, the biggest reason this was absolutely the
wrong choice is much simpler; it made the people that stayed at Facebook really
angry. We expected Facebook to do what they really wanted: stop doing the extra
open-source work, fork internally, and leave the community alone. Instead, they
somehow found the motivation to do a lot of work to set up a competing project.
Finally, we spent two additional years continuing to build the Presto name
rather than building the new name and brand. In hindsight, all of this was just
dumb, and we were suffering from our own sunk cost fallacy. So we continued
under the Presto name with the distinguishing suffix of PrestoSQL versus the
original project’s PrestoDB.

> # Building the Trino community

Reviewer: two ## for all subtitles..

---
layout: post
title: "Why leaving Facebook/Meta was the best thing we could do for the Trino Community"
author: "Martin Traverso, Dain Sundstrom, and David Phillips"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

It might surprise some that our departure from Facebook was one of the simplest 
decisions we’ve ever made. Many posts that discuss leaving a FAANG company focus
on leaving some grand sum of money or prestige of working at the company. For 
us, we were leaving the company where we had launched a project that we knew 
would quickly outgrow the walls of Facebook, and solve a much larger set of 
problems in the analytics domain. At the time we didn’t quite anticipate that 
Presto, a distributed SQL query engine for big data analytics, would be adopted 
around the globe by thousands of companies and an overwhelming number of 
industries. We appreciate Facebook for serving as the launchpad that inspired 
others to adopt Presto. Despite the harmonious beginnings, once the needs of the
community and Facebook no longer aligned, we had to leave, but we’ll get to that
part shortly.

<!--more-->

![|624x385](/assets/blog/leaving-facebook-meta-best-for-trino/original-gang.png)

> # People make up communities, not companies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## People make up communities, not companies
```

When we created Presto, it was clear to us that it needed to be open source.
Presto started in 2012, just before the Facebook IPO. The culture was very
conducive to starting an open source project. At that time, Facebook was working
on Open Compute which ended up disrupting the hardware industry, and we wanted

> to do the same thing for the analytics industry with Presto. We lobbied for and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to achieve a similar impact for the analytics industry with Presto. We lobbied for and
```

gained approval from the VP of Infrastructure, Jay Parikh, and released 

> [Presto as an open source project](https://web.archive.org/web/20220203224702/https://www.computerworld.com/article/2485668/facebook-goes-open-source-with-query-engine-for-big-data.html). It’s something that we wanted to

Reviewer: is there some better link?

Author: I want to use web archive since these websites are flakey and dissapear

do from the beginning, because we had worked with open source projects and 
believed that the most successful projects are open source.

Getting other people and companies involved makes for a healthier project. You
end up not just building something that satisfies your needs, but needs from

> everyone else, and in turn, you benefit from that. We reached out personally to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
everyone else, and in turn, you benefit. We reached out personally to
```

involved because we wanted to bootstrap a real community. Five people at
Facebook hacking away was not enough. We actually had these companies beta test
Presto, so that when we launched, the problems that they had found were fixed.

It’s important to understand why that’s beneficial to really grasp our
philosophy behind open source. In reality, when we say we’re getting more
companies involved, that’s true, but more importantly, we’re getting people
involved. Individuals in the tech space are interested in solving technology
problems. Companies are interested in solving problems that benefit their board,
investors, and their customers. It’s incredibly common to see an overlap in the
problems that engineers, analysts, and scientists are interested in solving with
the problems that companies need to solve, but it’s never guaranteed.

Moreover, the interest of a company is very susceptible to change from company
growth, IPOs, acquisitions, directional pivots, and general political and
cultural changes. As people start to put their time and energy into a project,
their own identity starts to blend with the success of the project. This is much

> less the case with corporations and since corporations include many people, it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
less the case with corporations. Since corporations include many people, it
```

only takes a small set of people in the right position to decide that a project
is no longer aligned with the direction or goals of a company.

Those of us in the Trino Software Foundation believe that 
[individuals that work on Trino actually make up the community](https://venturebeat.com/2021/08/27/who-owns-open-source-projects-people-or-companies/) and not the companies who so graciously allow their employees to
contribute. We view our community as visionaries that want to solve problems and
build systems that last for decades into the future. We don’t allow near-sighted
decisions that may affect the quality of the system, or that may diminish the
value of the application to the greater problem space. Most people do not want

> to work on something for years and then have the company change direction and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to work on something for years, and then have the company change direction and
```

open-source community neutral. It was at that point we knew that we had to
create a fork of the project if we wanted to keep the community's interest at
the forefront for the project to remain healthy.

It was also at this point we made our single biggest mistake. We didn’t change
the name away from Presto. It was admittedly hard to walk away from a name we
all knew and loved. We believed that we had set up the project, so that the name
"Presto" was owned by the community and not Facebook. The truth is that once the
community walked out of the project, Facebook was the only one left in Presto
and they became the sole owner. But, the biggest reason this was absolutely the
wrong choice is much simpler; it made the people that stayed at Facebook really
angry. We expected Facebook to do what they really wanted: stop doing the extra
open-source work, fork internally, and leave the community alone. Instead, they
somehow found the motivation to do a lot of work to set up a competing project.
Finally, we spent two additional years continuing to build the Presto name
rather than building the new name and brand. In hindsight, all of this was just
dumb, and we were suffering from our own 

> [sunk cost fallacy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sunk_cost). So we continued

Reviewer: not sure this is worth linking

Author: I'll remove

[we were forced to rebrand and changed the name to Trino](https://trino.io/blog/2020/12/27/announcing-trino.html).
We doubled down again on developing the community, and again participation
accelerated. It’s because of this that we believe the Trino community is stronger
than ever before.

![](/assets/blog/leaving-facebook-meta-best-for-trino/stars.jpeg)

Since the split, Trino release cycles have increased and far surpassed the speed
we had when we were running Presto. Once brand confusion was settled with the
change to the Trino name, the community numbers skyrocketed and we saw 
[unprecedented growth in metrics like GitHub stars, YouTube subscribers, and Slack members](https://trino.io/blog/2021/12/31/trino-2021-a-year-of-growth.html). 
We have many new community-driven features released in Trino that we will be
discussing in more detail in another blog post coming soon. To name a few, Trino now 
[natively supports a fault tolerance mode](https://trino.io/blog/2022/05/05/tardigrade-launch.html), 
[revamped its timestamp support](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/37), 
[dynamic partition pruning](https://trino.io/blog/2020/06/14/dynamic-partition-pruning.html), 

> [DML support for Iceberg](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/1324), 

Reviewer: remove this
